---
layout: post
title: 2019 Putnam Exam - A Personal Review
---

All problems are written and distributed by the Mathematical Association of America, please refer to the MAA website for the original source. When attempting these problems, it is fruitful to think about how they were *constructed*; In general this is a good approach to tackling scientific problems, think deeply about the underlying structure if one exists - I love it when these problems are a spinoff of something more profound. Although I am a bit tired of problems like these, I still find it rewarding to think about from time to time. 

<strong>Problem A1:</strong> Determine all possible values of the expression:

$$A^3 + B^3 + C^3 - 3ABC$$

Where $$A$$, $$B$$, and $$C$$ are nonnegative integers. 

*Solution:* The key is to consider the two substitutions $$B = A + b$$ and $$C = A + c$$.

<strong>Problem A2:</strong> In the triangle $$ABC$$, let $$G$$ be the centroid, and let $$I$$ be the center of the inscribed circle. Let $$\alpha$$ and $$\beta$$ be the angles at the vertices $$A$$ and $$B$$ respectively. Suppose that the segment $$IG$$ is parallel to $$AB$$ and that $$\beta = 2\tan^{-1}(1/3)$$. Find $$\alpha$$. 

*Solution:* 

<strong>Problem A4:</strong> Let $$f$$ be a continuous real-valued function on $$\mathbb{R}^3$$. Suppose that for every sphere $$S$$ of radius $$1$$, the integral of $$f(x, y, z)$$ over the surface of $$S$$ equals $$0$$. Must $$f(x, y, z)$$ be identically $$0$$? 

*Solution:* The answer is no, we can provide an example of some non-zero function $$f : \mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{R}$$ such that for every sphere $$S$$ of radius $$1$$ in $$3D$$ space, the integral of $$f(x, y, z)$$ over $$S$$ is equal to $$0$$. I enjoyed thinking about this problem quite a bit although I ultimately was not able to get it. If the answer was yes, we would have to find some sort of method to force $$f(x, y, z) = 0$$ in the entirety of the $3$-D space, however this is rather difficult to do since we are only provided with the condition that $$\int \int_S f dS = 0$$ for any sphere $$S$$, if we somehow select some $$n = 1, 2, ...$$ in a way that we know how to paramaterise, I am not sure that it would be strong enough to claim that $$f(x, y, z) = 0$$. Now it suffices to demonstrate a counter-example. 

Indeed we can simply let $$f(x, y, z) = g(z)$$ (i.e. remove dependence on the variables $$x$$ and $$y$$). Now substituting this into our condition yields that $$g(t) = \sin(\pi t)$$ is indeed a valid solution. 

<strong>Problem A5:</strong> Let $$p$$ be an odd prime number, and let $$\mathbb{F}_p$$ denote the field of integers modulo $$p$$. Let $$\mathbb{F}_p[x]$$ be the ring of polynomials over $$\mathbb{F}_p$$ and let $$q(x) \in \mathbb{F}_p[x]$$ be given by:

$$q(x) = \sum_{k=1}^{p-1} a_kx^k$$

Where:

$$a_k = k^{\frac{(p-1)}{2}} \text{mod p}$$

Find the greatest nonnegative integer $$n$$ such that $$(x-1)^n$$ divides $$q(x)$$ in $$\mathbb{F}_p[x]$$. 

*Solution:* 

<strong>Problem A6:</strong> Let $$g$$ be a real-valued function that is continuous on the closed integerval $$[0, 1]$$ and twice differentiable on the open interval $$(0, 1)$$. Suppose that for some real number $$r > 1$$,

$$\lim_{x \to 0^+} \frac{g(x)}{x^r} = 0$$

Prove that either:

$$\lim_{x \to 0^+} g'(x) = 0$$

<strong>Problem B1:</strong> Denote by $$\mathbb{Z}^2$$ the set of all points $$(x, y)$$ in the plane with integer coordinates. For each integer $$n \ge 0$$, let $$P_n$$ be the subset of $$\mathbb{Z}^2$$ consisting of the point $$(0, 0)$$ together with all points $$(x, y)$$ such that $$x^2 + y^2 = 2^k$$ for some integer $$k \le n$$. Determine, as a function of $$n$$, the number of four-point subsets of $$P_n$$ whose elements are the vertices of a square. 

*Solution:* 

<strong>Problem B2:</strong> For all $$n \ge 1$$, let:

$$a_n = \sum_{k=1}^{n-1} \frac{\sin(\frac{(2k-1)\pi}{2n}))}{\cos^2(\frac{(k-1)\pi}{2n})}\cos^2(\frac{k\pi}{2n})$$

Determine:

$$\lim_{n \to \infty} \frac{a_n}{n^3}$$

*Solution:* 

<strong>Problem B3:</strong> Let $$Q$$ be an $$n$$-by-$$n$$ real orthogonal matrix, and let $$u \in \mathbb{R}^n$$ be a unit column vector (that is, $$u^Tu = 1$$). Let $$P = I - 2uu^T$$, where $$I$$ is the $$n$$-by-$$n$$ identity matrix. Show that if $$1$$ is not an eigenvalue of $$Q$$, then $$1$$ is an eigenvalue of $$PQ$$.

*Solution:* 

<strong>Problem B4:</strong> Let $$F$$ be the set of functions $$f(x, y)$$ that are twice continuously differentiable for $$x \ge 1$$, $$y \ge 1$$ and that satisfy the following two equations (where subscripts denote partial derivatives):

$$xf_x + yf_y = xy \ln(xy)$$

$$x^2f_{xx} + y^2f_{yy} = xy$$

For each $$f \in F$$, let:

$$m(f) = \min_{s \ge 1} (f(s+1,s+1) - f(s+1,s) - f(s,s+1)+f(s,s))$$

Determine $$m(f)$$, and show that it is independent of the choice of $$f$$. 

*Solution:* 

<strong>Problem B5:</strong> Let $$F_m$$ be the $$m$$th Fibonacci number, defined by $$F_1 = F_2 = 1$$ and $$F_m = F_{m-1} + F_{m-2}$$ for all $$m \ge 3$$. Let $$p(x)$$ be the polynomial of degree $$1008$$ such that $$p(2n+1) = F_{2n+1}$$ for $$n=0,1,2,...,1008$$. FInd integers $$j$$ and $$k$$ such that $$p(2019) = F_j - F_k$$

*Solution:* 

<strong>Problem B6:</strong> Let $$\mathbb{Z}^n$$ be the integer lattice in $$\mathbb{R}^n$$. Two points in $$\mathbb{Z}^n$$ are called $$\textit{neighbours}$$ if they differ by exactly $$1$$ in one coordinate and are equal in all other coordinates. For which integers $$n \ge 1$$ does there exist a set of points $$S \subset \mathbb{Z}^n$$ satisfying the following two conditions? 
(1) If $$p$$ is in $$S$$ then none of the neighbours of $$p$$ are in $$S$$
(2) If $$p \in \mathbb{Z}^n$$ is not in $$S$$, then exactly one of the neighbours of $$p$$ are in $$S$$. 

*Solution:* 
