---
layout: post
title: "ChipNemo and BioNemo: NVIDIA's Play"
date: 2024-12-24
categories: AI semiconductor
author: Bruce Changlong Xu
---

BioNeMo is a modular framework designed to facilitate the training and deployment of AI models for computational biology and chemistry. Built on NVIDIA’s [NeMo](https://github.com/NVIDIA/NeMo) and [Megatron-LM](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1909.08053), it enables high-throughput training and inference for biomolecular models, providing significant improvements over traditional methods. BioNeMo allows researchers to scale their models across multiple GPUs, reducing training times significantly. For example, the framework enables training of a 3-billion parameter BERT-based protein language model (pLM) on 256 NVIDIA A100s in just 4.2 days—an efficiency boost compared to standard deep learning libraries. With support for protein sequence modeling (ESM-2) and single-cell expression modeling (Geneformer), BioNeMo provides off-the-shelf solutions for a range of biomolecular applications. BioNeMo introduces optimized loaders for genomics and proteomics datasets, ensuring efficient memory management and reducing preprocessing overhead. Companies like A-Alpha Bio have leveraged BioNeMo to enhance protein-protein interaction (PPI) prediction, achieving a 12-fold increase in inference speed and expanding the scope of potential drug candidates. The ability to iterate quickly on computational experiments reduces the need for extensive wet-lab testing, ultimately accelerating the pace of therapeutic innovation.

ChipNeMo is a domain-adapted large language model designed to assist in semiconductor design, integrating AI-driven solutions for engineering assistant chatbots, electronic design automation (EDA) script generation, and bug summarization. Unlike general-purpose LLMs, ChipNeMo undergoes continued pretraining on semiconductor-specific datasets, ensuring higher accuracy in chip design-related tasks. The framework aligns its models using a combination of domain-specific instruction tuning and retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), improving contextual understanding in chip design queries. ChipNeMo’s 70B parameter model outperforms GPT-4 in EDA script generation and engineering assistant chatbot tasks, highlighting the importance of domain customization in LLMs.

https://arxiv.org/html/2411.10548v1
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2311.00176
