---
layout: post
title: "AlphaFold, RFDiffusion and ESM: Unravelling Nature's Deepest Secrets"
date: 2024-12-22
categories: AI oncology
author: Bruce Changlong Xu
---

Predicting the structure of biomolecular interactions has long been a formidable challenge in computational biology. With the advent of [AlphaFold 3](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-024-07487-w), DeepMind has once again redefined what is possible—expanding beyond proteins to accurately model complexes involving nucleic acids, small molecules, ions, and modified residues. This advancement is not merely an iteration of previous models; it represents a paradigm shift in structural biology. By incorporating diffusion-based deep learning, AlphaFold 3 surpasses specialized docking tools and nucleic acid predictors, demonstrating unprecedented accuracy in modeling biomolecular interactions. The implications are vast, from drug discovery to understanding cellular mechanisms at an atomic level. This post delves into how AlphaFold 3 achieves its groundbreaking accuracy, what it means for the future of computational biology, and how this single, unified deep-learning framework is paving the way for a new era in biomolecular modeling. Let's talk first talk about [AlphaFold](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-021-03819-2). 

The central goal of the AlphFold system is to **predict a protein's three dimensional structure based solely on its amino acid sequence**, which the system does with near experimental accuracy (this has been historically bottlenecked by laborious experimental detemrination of protein structure). **Levinthal's Paradox** states that a protein could theoretically explore _astronomical conformations_ before reaching its native folded state. In reality however, proteins fold in _milliseconds to seconds_, which suggests that there are **constraints and patterns** in fold that can be learned. Indeed, X-ray crystallography and Cryo-EM are slow and expensive, and to interrogate protein structure and folding is paramount towards the endeavour of designing potent therapeutics for patients. 

Prior to AlphaFold, two primary computational approaches have been used for protein structure prediction; AlphaFold merges and integrates both of these perspectives with AI:

1. _Physics-based approaches:_ Through molecular dynamics and statistical approximations but often leads to computaitons that are intractable. 
2. _Bioinformatics:_ Leveraging evolutionary history and sequence homology but faltering when homologous structures are unavailable. 

The backbone of the AlphaFold architecture is a _transformer-based_ model designed to predict 3D protein structures from amino acid sequences by integrating evolutionary, geometric and physical constraints. THere are three primary components: Input processing (MSAs and Templates), Core Model (Evoformer and Structure), Output (3D Structure Prediction and Confidence Scoring). Indeed, one of AlphaFold's major breakthroughs arises from how it **processes input data**. Unlike traditional protein modeling solutions that rely soley on phyiscs-based simulations, AlphaFold _learns directly from sequence and evolutionary data_ using deep learning, with the premise that **protein folding is heavily constraint by evolution**. 

_**What is a [Multiple Sequence Alignment (MSA)](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-019-56499-4)?**_ Proteins do not evolve randomly, instead functional constraints force certain amino acids to remain conserved. Some amino acids mutate together, meaning if one changes, another must also change to maintain stability. Hence evolution leaves behind a hidden pattern of co-evolution which can be mined from large sequence databases. A _[MSA (Multiple Sequence Alignment)](https://brucechanglongxu.github.io/oncology/2024/12/29/kinasesandmsa.html)_ is a _matrix representation_ of how similar proteins from different species align. Given a target protein sequence, we search large genetic databases such as Uniprot to find homologous sequences, and align them. The output is an alignment of many sequences with columns showing _evolutionary variation_ at each position. 

In short, it is a method used to align three or more biological sequences (DNA, RNA, protein) to identify regions of similarity that may indicate functional, structural, or evolutionary relationships. 