---
layout: post
title: "Genetics"
date: 2025-02-08
categories: genomics
author: Bruce Changlong Xu
---

## Hardy-Weinberg Equation

For a population in _genetic equilibrium_, $$p^2 + 2pq + q^2 = 1$$ (genotypic frequencies), and $$p + q = 1$$ (allelic frequencies). $$p^2$$ is the homozygoud dominant frequency, $$2pq$$ is the heterozygous frequency, and $$q^2$$ is the homozygous recessive frequency. Note that if a **population is evolving, Hardy-Weinberg does not apply**. The principle states that _allele and genotype frequencies_ in a population remain constant from generation to generation **if no evolutionary forces are acting upon it**. The principle is useful because it provides a baseline to compare real populations i.e. if a population deviates from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, it indicates that evolutionary forces (e.g. selection, mutation, migration) are at play. 

Hardy-Weinberg consists of two equations:

1. **Allele Frequencies:** Since each individual inherits two alleles (one from each parent), the sum of allele frequencies must equal $$1$$. $$p$$ is the frequency of the dominant allele (A) and $$q$$ is the frequency of the recessive allele (a).  

$$p + q = 1$$

2. **Genotypic Frequencies:** This equation describes how alleles combine to form different genotypes in a population. $$p^2$$ is the frequency of homozygoud dominant individuals (AA), $$2pq$$ is the frequency of heterozygous individuals (Aa), and $$q^2$$ is the frequency of homozygous recessive individuals (aa). 

$$p^2 + 2pq + q^2 = 1$$

Hence if we are given the frequency of one genotype, we can deterine all others using these equations. For a population to be in _Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium_, five key conditions must be met. 