---
layout: post
title: "Reflections on nnUnet"
date: 2025-01-31
categories: AI vision
author: Bruce Changlong Xu
---

nnU-Net is a self-configuring deep learning-based framework for biomedical image segmentation, it automatically adapts its pipeline (preprocessing, network architecture, training and post-processing) to any new dataset without human intervention.

## U-Net Architecture 

U-Net is a fully convolutionarl netural network (FCN) that is designed specifically for biomedical image segmentation. Unlike traditional CNNs, which are used for classification, U-Net outputs **pixel-wise segmentations** (assigning a class label to each pixel), making it ideal for tasks such as tumor detection and organ segmentation. The U-Net architecture works well with very few labeled images, and incorporates skip connections to preserve fine details. Inference is extremely fast (less than $$1$$ second per image on GPU), and we can extend this to many other architectures (e.g. nnUNet). 

**Architecture**

The U-Net architecture is extremely influential, and utilizes a symmetric encoder-decoder structure with skip connections. The core intuition is to capture **both high level semantic features** and **fine-grained spatial details** for more precise segmentation. Classic CNNs (ResNet, VGG) focus on understanding _what_ is in an image, but they discard crucial spatial information. True segmentation requires pixel-wise predictions (i.e. a U-shaped structure is needed to retain spatial details). Furthermore, traditional CNNs use pooling layers, which improve feature extraction but reduce resolution. A U-Net solves this issue by introducing 1. An encoder (contracting path) for feature extraction, and 2. A decoder (expanding path) for precise localization. These are unified by skip connections to combine fine-grained and high-level features. 

_Skip Connections_ 

Skip connections are one of the key innovations behind the U-Net, allowing it to preserve fine details whilst also benefiting from deep feature extraction. The core idea behind skip connections is to transfer information directly from the encoder to the decoder so that the network does not have to rely solely on learning through upsampling. In a traditional encoder-decoder architecture, the contracting path (encoder) progressively reduces spatial resolution through convolution and pooling, leading to two main problems:

1. **Loss of Fine-Grained Spatial Information:** Pooling operations discard detailed structures, making it difficult to recover precise object boundaries. For example in the situation of a cell in a microscopic image, pooling layers may lose small cell edges. 
2. **Bottlneck Effect (Vanishing Details):** When features are downsampled to a low-dimensional representation, reconstructing a high resolution segmentation map becomes hard. Upsampling alone is not enough to recover lost details. 

_Can we just ask more layers to the decoder to recover details?_ The answer is no. The decoder does not have access to the fine-grained details that were lost in the encouder, and further upsampling will only accentuate hallucinations rather than accurate detail recovery. In come skip connections. 

Skip connections directly transfer feature maps from the encoder to the corresponding level in the decoder. Instead of throwing away the high resolution spatial features, skip connections allow the decoder to use them directly. This helps preserve details such as edges, textures, and object boundaries. Think of it like a highway for information -- without highways (skip connections) cars must pass through every local road (deep layers) to reach their destination. However with the introduction of highways (skip connections) some cars (low-level details) can bypass congested areas and go directly to their goal. In neural networks, low-level features (edges, textures) get passed directly to the high-resolution layers, which allows precise segmentaiton masks whilst stil benefiting from deep semantic feature extraction. 

Each level of the encoder learns a different level of abstraction, the first layer learns very fine details (edges, textures), the middle layer learns (shapes, object boundaries) and the deeper layers learn high level abstract information (object presence, category). Without skip connections, the decoder only receives the deepest, most abstract features, which lack fine details. The upsampling process struggles to reconstruct high-resolution segmentation masks. With skip connections, the decoder has access to both abstract (high-level) and detailed (low-level) features. Mathematically, skip connections can be thought of as:

$$F_{skip} = \textbf{Concat}(F_{enc}, F_{dec})$$

where $$F_{enc}$$ is the feature map from encoder, and $$F_{dec}$$ is the corresponding feature map from the decoder. This concatenation ensures that the decoder receives both high-resolution details and high-level semantic features. Another common formulation weights the encoder and decoder with factors that allow a balance between encoder and decoder features.

$$F_{skip} = \alpha F_{enc} + \beta F_{dec}$$

On a more theoretical note, in deep networks, gradients tend to become very small as they propagate backward, making it difficult for early layers to learn. Skip connects create shorter paths for gradients, which prevents vanishing gradients, and allows earlier layers to remain trainable improving overall network performance. Without skip connections, deep networks often take longer to converge -- by passing clean gradients directly, skip connections speed up learning and reduce training instability. Indeed, with skip connections the encoders can now focus on feature extraction, whilst decoders can focus on reconstruction. In medical images, important structures like tumors, vessels or organs often have subtle texture differences - skip connections help retain these high frequency details which improve detection and accuracy. 

**Training** 

## nnUNet 

The motivation behind nnU-net is as follows: traditional deep learning models for segmentation require _task-specific tuning_, which makes it challenging to generalize across datasets with different image modalities (CT, MRI, fluorescence microscopy), voxel spacing/anisotropy, class distributions and region sizes, and data availability constraints. **nnU-Net** automates method configuration using fixed parameters (universal configurations optimized across many datasets), rule-based parameters (adaptations inferred from dataset properties), empirical parameters (that are learned from training data). The model is based on a **[U-Net](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1505.04597)** backbone, but dynamically adjusts dimensionality (2D, 3D, 3D cascade), network depth, patch size and batch size, and incorporates automatica data augmentation, normalization and post-processing strategies. 

Indeed the network first extracts key properties like voxel size, image dimensions, and then subsequently configures the network hyperparameters heuristically (selecting the best-performing models through cross validations); it then uses test-time heuristics to improve performance. nnU-Net formulates _heuristic rules_ based on dataset fingerprints, for example (larger patch size means more spatial context, larger batch size means more stable gradients), and optimizes for a balance given GPU memory constraints. It ensures the receptive field is at least as large as the patch size, and dynamically configures pooling operations/feature map sizes. THe network uses 2D for small datasets/thin structures, 3D for volumetric consistency, and a 3D cascade for high-resolution multi-scale segmentation.



- Isensee, Fabian, et al. "nnU-Net: A Self-Configuring Method for Deep Learning-Based Biomedical Image Segmentation." Nature Methods, vol. 18, 2021, pp. 203–211, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-020-01008-z.
- Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation. International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention (MICCAI), 2015.
