---
layout: post
title: "Cell Cycle"
date: 2025-02-21
categories: oncology
author: Bruce Changlong Xu
---

The cell cycle has two major phases: interphase (G0, G1, S, G2) and the mitotic phase (M). It is an ordered sequence of events involving cell growth and cell division that produces two new daughter cells. A series of precisely timed and carefully regulated stages of growth, DNA replication, and division that produces two identical (clone) cells. 

## Cell Cycle Control

The cell cycle is controlled by mechanisms both internal and external to the cell, and by regulator molecules. It is controlled at three external checkpoints; Damage to DNA and other external factors are evaluated at the **G1 checkpoint**. If conditions are inadequate, the cell will not be allowed to continue to the S phase of interphase. The **G2 checkpoint** ensures all the chromosomes are replicated and that the replicated DNA is not damaged before the cell enters mitosis. 

A checkpoint is one of several points in the eukaryotic cell cycle at which the progression of a cell to the next stage in the cycle can be stopped until conditions are favourable. At the G2 checkpoint, DNA is checked to ensure that all chromosomes were duplicated and that there are no mistakes in newly synthesized DNA. Additionally, cell size and energy reserves are evaluated. The M checkpoint confirms the correct attachment of the mitotic spindle fibers to the kinetochores, positive cell regulators such as Cyclin and CDK perform tasks that advance the cell cycle to the next stage. Negatie regulators such as Rb, p53, and p21 block the progression of the cell cycle until certain events have occurred. CDK must bind to a Cyclin, and it must be phosphorylated in the correct position to become fully active. R band other negative regulatory proteins controll cell division, so they prevent the formation of tumors. The G1 checkpoint is a point in the animal cell cycle at which the cell becomes "committed" to the cell cycle, which is determined by external factors and signals. 

## Interphase

The cell cycle has two distinct phases, interphase and the m-phase, or Mitosis. The interphase comprises of three distinct phases:

1. **G1 Phase**: This goes on for about 10 hours, cellular content, exluding the chromosomes are duplicated. Here, the _G1 checkpoint_ checks that the nutrients are sufficient, growth factors are sufficient and the DNA is not damaged. 
2. **S Phase**: This goes on for about 9 hours, where DNA replication and chromosome duplication (note that here there are still 46 chromosomes but 92 chromatids). 
3. **G2 Phase**: The cell grows, and prepares for mitosis, and it checkrs for errors (note that here there are still 46 chromosomes but 92 chromatids). Here, the _G2 checkpoint_ will check that the chromosome replication is complete, and there is no DNA damage. 

We then enter **mitosis**, where we divide the cell into two daughter cells, where each has 46 chromosomes and 46 chromatids each. Each of these daughter cells do not need to enter growth and synthesis phase diretly (G1, S) but can enter cell arrest first (G0 phase). Mitosis goes on for about an hour. 

## Mitosis

Mitosis consists of four distinct phases, where the last phase Cytokinesis is part of the M phase but not Mitosis: 

1. **Prophase**: Centrosomes, mitotic spindle, the genetic material will have 46 chromosome, or 23 pairs of chromosomes with 92 chromatids. The centromere is the structure that is holding the chromatids together. Chromosomal material condenses to form a compact mitotic chromosome. Cytoskeleton is disassmbled and mitotic spindle is assembled. Nuclear envelope is dispensed. 
2. **Metaphase**: The early stage of metaphase is _prometaphase_ where we have fragments of nuclear envelope, and there are now microtubules that the chromosomal microtubules attach to the kineticores of the chromosomes. We then enter Metaphase, where the chromosomes align themselves across the equator, and the centrosomes migrate to the north and south, connecting to the chromosomes via mitotic spindles. The centrosomes on each of the poles will have microtubules attaching to the same chromosomes. 
3. **Anaphase**: In anaphase, the centromeres split and the chromatids separate, chromosomes move to the opposite spindle poles, and the spindle poles move further apart. The microtubules with the centrosomes will split the chromosomes apart, into to chromsomes each with one chromatid (46 chromosomes and 92 chromatids into 92 chromosomes and 92 chromatids). 
4. **Telophase**: Chromosomes are clustering at opposite poles, and become dispersed, nuclear envelope assembles and organelles form. 
5. **Cytokinesis** (Not strictly part of mitosis): Separate into daughter cells, where each of the daughter cells have 23 chromosomes and 46 chromatids each. 
