---
layout: post
title: "DeepSeek V1 and Scaling Laws"
date: 2025-01-31
categories: Software Engineering
author: Bruce Changlong Xu
---

One of the driving force of modern day AI is that _scaling compute and data leads to predictable and expected improvements_. According to Anthropic's Dario Amodei, there is a smooth linear relationship between compute investment and performance (where spending $$N$$ times more on compute will lead to a $$1 + \log N$$ times improvement in intelligence under a particular benchmark). This law, or the central "dogma" of AI is the driving force behind the hundred billion dollar valuations of frontier model companies today (OpenAI, Anthropic) and ambitious national-scale projects such as StarGate. 

Indeed, there is opportunity however, for this scaling curve to _shift downwards_ through algorithmic and architectural innovation at both the hardware and software levels (we've all heard of "Huang's Law"). Better architectures (transformer augmentations, post-transformer architectures like state space models), nourishing the underlying hardware with higher utilization (optimizing KV-cache placements, flash-attention), and improving the way we train, deploy and reason with these frontier models. According to Ilya Sutskever at last year's NeurIps conference - "pre-training has come to an end, as we have but one web, and limitless compute (paraphrased)". What this means is that the spotlight is no longer solely on scaling laws for pre-training, but rather on inference and test-time. 

OpenAI's o1-preview, Anthropic's Claude 3.5 introduced and pioneered the usage of reinforcement and layering fundamental _reasoning_ frameworks on top of pre-training, which allowed models to reason as novel, independent thinkers outside of the strict boundaries of their static training datasets. Now models were no longer purely parrots who had read more books than a human could read in their lifetime, these frontier models also had the capacity to _think_ and _reason_ with the massive amount of data points that they have seen. Hence these models were observed to bloom in their capabilities for complex reasoning tasks such as programming and mathematics. Indeed, scaling the compute on this "reasoning" layer of the training process is still in its infancy. In this series of blog posts, we will dive into the beautiful ideas that propelled DeepSeek to the world stage.  

**DeepSeek V1**

Let us first begin by summating the powerful takeaways from the DeekSeek V1 paper. 

1. _They introduce a new **节省** paradigm for scaling_ 

DeepSeek proposes a new mtric for scaling beyond just parameter count: **non-embedding FLOPs/token (M)** motivated by their resource constraints. This framework improves the compute budget based scaling laws, challenging prior studies. They introduce empirical formulas $$M_{opt} \propto C^{0.5243}$$ and $$D_{opt} \propto C^{0.4757}$$ for data scale and model scale respectively, demonstrating that future LLM scaling can be optimized based on computational efficiency rather than raw parameter count. Large models can be designed more cost-effectively with better tradeoffs between size and dataset size. 

2. _Engineering innovations during training_ 

DeepSeek introduced a new model training paradigm that combined traditional data parallelism, tensor parallelism, sequence parallelism and 1F1B pipeline parallelism to maximize efficiency across GPU clusters. This minimized redundant memory allocations, splits optimizer states across GPUs for larger batch sizes, and reduced memory overhead in transformer attention layers. 

3. _DPO instead of RLHF for reasoning_ 

Instead of using RLHF for reasoning/post-training alignment, DeepSeek refined its LLM using DPO (which was explored in our blog post "fine-tuning, your grace"). Indeed, DPO does not require an explicit reward model, and leads to faster convergence, higher knowledge retention (no knowledge degradation in favor of human alignment). This signals a change in the reasoning winds where OpenAI, Anthropic, Google will most likely begin to follow. 

4. 


