---
layout: post
title: "Bacteriology and Virology"
date: 2025-02-02
categories: infectiousdisease
author: Bruce Changlong Xu
---

Viruses and bacteria are among the most enigmatic entities in biology -- microscopic agents that exist in the gray area between life and non-life. They lack cellular structures and the ability to reproduce independently, yet they have influenced evolution, shaped ecosystems, and driven medical advancements. The study of virology and bacteriology unveils both the destructive and transformative power of these microorganisms, providing key insights into genetics, immunity and biotechnology. _"There are not enough vaccines in the world."_ This reality underscores the ongoing battle against infectious diseases. Lower respiratory tract infections such as Pneumonia, Tuberculosis (TB), and Diarrheal diseases, claim millions of lives annually, particularly in developing nations where healthcare access is limited. Diarrheal diseases alone cause over two million deaths per year, often due to dehydration and gastrointestinal tract leakage. 

Tuberculosis is particularly concerning as it often co-infects individuals with HIV, further weakening the immune system. Moreover, many infectious diseases once thought to be eradicated have evolved resistance to therapeutic agents, leading to the emergence of _**escape pathogens**_ - microbes that have developed mechanisms to evade drugs and immune responses. To combat this, combination therapies, or **drug cocktails** are used in treatment strategies, such as those for **Helicobacter Pylori** which causes gastritis, ulcers and stomach cancer. 

## Bacterial Classifications

1. **Gram-Positive:** These have a **single** thick peptidoglycan layer (20-80nm), and they stain _purple_ during Gram staining; relatively easier to treat with antibiotics. 
2. **Gram-Negative:** Have two membranes (outer membrane and inner membrane) sandwiching a thin peptidoglycan layer. The outer membrane is decorated with complex **lipopolysaccharides** (LPS) forming a barrier that makes these bacteria harder to treat. They stain _pink_ during Gram stain, and are more prone to developing antibiotic resistance. 
3. **Mycobacteria (e.g. Tuberculosis):** 

## Antibiotics and their Mechanisms of Action

Antibiotics are among the most significant medical discoveries, providing targeted treatment for bacterial infections. They function by disrupting essential bacterial processes, leading to bacterial death or growth inhibition. 

1. **Beta-Lactams** _(Penicillins, Cephalosporins, Carbapenems, Monobactams)_ These target **bacterial cell wall synthesis** which prevents peptidoglycan cross-linking, it is effective against **Gram-positive** bacteria due to their thick peptidoglycan layer. 
2. **Glycopeptides** _(Vancomycin, Teicoplanin)_ These inhibit **peptidoglycan polymerization** which is crucial for Gram-positive bacterial cell walls. It is often used for **methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)** infections. 
3. **Macrolides** 
4. **Aminoglycosides** 
5. **Tetracyclins** 
6. **Fluoroquinolones**

## mRNA-based Vaccines

mRNA-based vaccines have revolutionized the field of infectious disease prevention. Unlike traditional vaccines, which use inactivated or attenuated pathogens, mRNA vaccines deliver genetic instructions that enable cells to produce a harmless viral protein, hence triggering an immune response. The mRNA is encapsulated in lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) which serve as protective carriers, facilitating deliver into host cells. Once inside, the mRNA is translated by cellular ribosomes to produce the viral antigen -- most commonly the **spike protein** of the virus. The immune system then recognizes this protein as foreign, prompting the activation of T-cells and the production of neutralizing antibodies. 

Unlike conventional vaccines, which require growing and inactivating pathogens, mRNA vaccines **can be designed and synthesized quickly**, as demonstrated by the swift developing of COVID-19 vaccines. They can elicit both _cell-mediated_ (T-cell activation) and _humoral_ (antibody production) immune response, providing robust and long-lasting protection (**very strong immune response**). Since mRNA vaccines do not contain live or inactivated viruses, **they eliminate the risk of disease caused by attenuated pathogens**. mRNA vaccine sequences can be rapidly modified to target emerging viral variants, making them highly effective against evolving pathogens. 

The Pfizer-BioNTech (BNT162b2) and Moderna (mRNA-1273) vaccines were the first widely used mRNA vaccines, proving their efficacy and safety in preventing severe COVID-19. Ongoing research is exploring mRNA vaccines for seasonal and pandemic influenza strains, and also personalized cancer vaccines, designed to trigger an immune response against tumor-specific antigens. Despite their advantages, mRNA vaccines require colda chain storage (ultra-cold storage), and have short-term side effects/immunogeneicity. 