---
layout: post
title: "Enzymes"
date: 2025-02-07
categories: endocrinology
author: Bruce Changlong Xu
---

Enzymes are proteins (sometimes RNA-ribozymes) that catalyze reactions, they do not get consumed in the reaction and they recycle/catalyze multiple reactions. They work by **lowering activation energy**, stabilizing the transition state and reducing the energy barrier. They **do NOT change Gibbs Free Energy** and do not affect spontaneity, only the reaction rate. They speed up both the forward and reverse reactions **but do not change Keq**. 

There are several models of Enzyme-Substrate binding:

1. **Lock and Key Model:** The Enzyme has a preformed activate site that perfectly fits the substrate. 
2. **Induced Fit Model (Correct):** The enzyme active site undergoes conformational changes to better accommodate the substrate. 

The active site is highly specific (one enzyme matches only one or a handful of substrates), and it bind sthrough weak interactions (H-bonds etc.). **Cofactors (inorganic)** often exist to stabilize the enzyme structure (and aid catalysis), examples being Mg2+, Zn2+. **Coenzymes (organic)** exist to carry electrons or chemical groups (e.g. NAD+, FAD, COA). 

## Michaelis-Menten (Kinetics)

Enzyme Kinetics are governed by the following key equation:
$$v = \frac{V_{max}[S]}{K_m + [S]}$$
where $$v$$ is the reaction velocity, $$V_{max}$$ is the maximum velocity (enzyme saturation), $$K_m$$ is the substrate ocncentration at $$\frac{1}{2} V_{max}$$ and $$[S]$$ is the substrate concentration. 

The $$K_m$$ denotes the concentration of the substrate at half of the maximum velocity, a low $$K_m$$ indicates high affinity, whereas a high $$K_m$$ indicates low substrate-enzyme affinity (since more substrate is required to reach half of the maximum enzyme reaction speed). 

$$V_{max}$$ is the maximum reaction rate when all enzymes are occupied, it is affected by enzyme concentration. The 

_Lineweaver-Burck Plot_

$$\frac{1}{v} = \frac{K_m}{V_{max}[S]} + \frac{1}{V_{max}}$$
This is the reciprocated version of the M-M equation, where the Y-intercept is $$\frac{1}{V_{max}}$$ and the X-intercept is $$-\frac{1}{K_m}$$. The slope is 

## Enzyme Inhibition

There are four main types of enzyme inhibition, competitive inhibition, noncompetitive inhibition, uncompetitive inhibition and mixed inhibition. 

1. **Competitive Inhibition:** The inhibitor competes with substrate for the active site, there is no effect on $$V_{max}$$ because increasing substrate concentration $$[S]$$ outcompetes the inhibitor. It raises $$K_m$$ (enzyme has a lower substrate affinity). An example would be that **Statins competitively inhibit HMG-CoA reductase.**
2. **Noncompetitive Inhibition:** Here the inhibitor binds to an allosteric site (not the active site), and we reduce enzyme efficiency by changing the enzyme's conformation. We **lower** $$V_{max}$$ (less functioal enzymes), but $$K_m$$ **remains the same** because substrate binding is unaffected. This _cannot_ be overcome by increasing substrate concentration. An example would be **Asciminib in BCR-ABL**. 
3. **Uncompetitive Inhibition:** The inhibitor binds to only the enzyme-substrate (ES) complex, and locks the substrate in place, preventing product formation. It lowers both $$V_{max}$$ and $$K_m$$ (enzyme works less efficiently but has a stronger apparent affinity), and cannot be overcome by increasing $$[S]$$. 
4. **Mixed Inhibition:** The inhibitor binds to _both_ the free enzyme and the ES complex (preferentially one over the other). If the inhibitor binds to tne enzyme, this increases $$K_m$$ (competitive-like), whereas if the inhibitor binds to the ES complex this decreases $$K_m$$ (uncompetitive-like). This always decreases $$V_{max}$$. 

## Enzyme Regulation and Metabolic Influence

**Negative Feedback Loops:** The final product of a metabolic pathway inhibits an earlier enzyme to prevent overproduction; this is the most common regulatory mechanism in metabolism. A key example is _ATP regulation of glycolysis_. **Phosphofructokinase-1** is the rate-limiting enzyme of glycolysis, is inhibited by ATP and citrate (high energy signals), and is activated by AMP (a low energy signal). ATP is "STOP" signal for glycolysis when energy is abundant, and AMP is the "GO" signal to make more ATMP when energy is low. 

